manifest: Matter applications versioning by VERSION file implemented (#13476)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/end_product/versioning.rst

.. _ug_versioning_in_matter:

Maintaining firmware version
############################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> Device Firmware Update (DFU) is the procedure of upgrading the application firmware version on a device.

Reviewer: Btw. are we linking somewhere to: https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/version/index.html#application-version-management

It's a good documentation.. and might eliminate a need to describe all the things again here?

Following lines should be added to mentioned file to change Matter version:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION` =<version number>

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING` ="<version string>"

Additionally Nordic chips uses MCUBoot Image Tool, you should also edit:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` ="<app version major number . app version minor number . app patch level . app version tweak>"

.. _ug_matter_dfu_smp:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Bluetooth LE versioning
====================================================

For DFU over Bluetooth LE you only needs to change :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` config in the prj.conf file:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION`=<app version major number . app version minor number . app patch level . app version tweak>

.. _ug_matter_dfu_performing:

Performing Device Firmware Upgrade
**********************************

> After seting up proper configuration of application version, you can perform device firmware upgrade which is explained in `Performing Device Firmware Upgrade in the nRF Connect examples <https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/matter/nrfconnect_examples_software_update.html>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After properly configuring the application version, you can perform device firmware upgrade as explained in :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_examples_software_update`.
```

To use versioning with specified for this file, user needs to create in the application directory a file named VERSION with proper content:

.. code-block:: console
    VERSION_MAJOR =
    VERSION_MINOR =
    PATCHLEVEL =
    VERSION_TWEAK =

.. note::
   It is crucial to assign any value to one of the variables, if not, VERSION file will be ignored and Kconfig values will be assgined to version of application.

Versioning by changing configuration
************************************

.. _ug_matter_dfu_ota:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Matter
===================================

In case of DFU over Matter user should eddit prj.conf file in the application directory.
Following lines should be added to mentioned file to change Matter version:

.. code-block:: console
    CONFIG_CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION=<version number>

.. code-block:: console
    CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING="<version string>"

Additionally Nordic chips uses MCUBoot Image Tool, user should also edit:

.. code-block:: console
    CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION="<app version major number . app version minor number . app patch level . app version tweak>"

.. _ug_matter_dfu_smp:

> Device Firmware Upgrade over Bluetooth LE

Reviewer 3: It's not only for DFU over BLE. This is for configuring versions of updates images used by the MCUBoot bootloader, but bootloader is involved in any form of DFU. When DFU over Matter is used, one or more MCUBoot update images are bundled into a Matter OTA image that has an extra header and can use a separate versioning scheme.

So when DFU over Matter is used, the versions are checked at two levels:
1. First, a new image is downloaded only if its version is higher than `CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION`.
2. Secondly, after downloading an image and rebooting into bootloader, the bootloader checks if the new image version is not less than the current image version (`MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION`).

The second step is required despite of 1, because 1 doesn't provide any security - Matter images are not signed so the version is used only to check if a new version is available but 2 can enforce that only newer images be installed.

Reviewer 3: nvm, I jumped to this section without reading the previous one :)

Versioning can be done by creating `VERSION file<https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/version/index.html>`_, or by chenging build configuration in prf.conf.

Versioning with VERSION file
****************************

VERSION file is resposible for assignment values to MCUBoot version in the following way:
"MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH.TWEAK"

To use versioning with specified for this file, user needs to create in the application directory a file named VERSION with proper content:

.. code-block:: console

    VERSION_MAJOR =
    VERSION_MINOR =
    PATCHLEVEL =
    VERSION_TWEAK =

.. note::
   It is crucial to assign any value to one of the variables, if not, VERSION file will be ignored and Kconfig values will be assgined to version of application.

Versioning by changing configuration
************************************

.. _ug_matter_dfu_ota:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Matter
===================================

In case of DFU over Matter user should eddit prj.conf file in the application directory.
Following lines should be added to mentioned file to change Matter version:

.. code-block:: console

>     CONFIG_CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION=<version number>

Reviewer 4: <version number> and <version string> should be mentioned in a text before using. Also console code block doesn't seem to be correct here. You should better use :kconfig:option: before the Kconfig name.

.. code-block:: console
    CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING="<version string>"

Additionally Nordic chips uses MCUBoot Image Tool, user should also edit:

.. code-block:: console

>     CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION="<app version major number . app version minor number . app patch level . app version tweak>"

Reviewer 4: Ditto

.. _ug_matter_dfu_smp:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Bluetooth LE
=========================================

For DFU over Bluetooth LE user only needs to add only one configuration in the prj.conf file:

.. code-block:: console
    CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION=<app version major number . app version minor number . app patch level . app version tweak>

> .. _ug_matter_device_attestation_cert_pki:

Reviewer 4: To be removed?

.. _ug_versioning_in_matter:

Maintaining firmware version
############################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Device Firmware Update (DFU) is the procedure of upgrading the application firmware version on a device.
For example, you can transfer the updated images to the device by:

* Upgrade over Bluetooth® Low Energy (LE).
* :ref:`Upgrade over Matter (Matter OTA)<ug_matter_overview_dfu>`, where the updates are sent over the Matter fabric.

Before creating and performing DFU, you need to prepare a proper versioning configuration.

> Versioning can be maintained by creating a :ref:`VERSION file<app-version-details>` file, or by using Kconfig options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Versioning can be maintained by creating a :ref:`VERSION<app-version-details>` file, or by using Kconfig options.
```

Using :file:`VERSION` file
**************************

> To implement versioning based on VERSION file, you must create a file named VERSION within the application directory and ensure it contains the appropriate content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To implement versioning based on a :file:`VERSION` file, you must create a file named :file:`VERSION` within the application directory and ensure it contains the appropriate content:
```

.. code-block:: console

    VERSION_MAJOR =
    VERSION_MINOR =
    PATCHLEVEL =
    VERSION_TWEAK =

.. note::
   You must assign a value to at least one of the variables.
   If not, the :file:`VERSION` file will cause error.

> For example:
> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example:

.. code-block:: console
```

   VERSION_MAJOR = 2
   VERSION_MINOR = 5
   PATCHLEVEL = 99
   VERSION_TWEAK = 0

A :file:`VERSION` file is responsible for assigning values to MCUboot version in the following format: ``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH.TWEAK``.

Using KConfig options
*********************

Depending on how you transfer the updated images to the device, you need to use different Kconfig options.

.. _ug_matter_dfu_ota:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Matter versioning
==============================================

When using DFU over Matter, you must edit the :file:`prj.conf` file in the application directory.
Add the following Kconfig options to change the version:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION` to set to the version number.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING` to set the version string.

Additionally, since Nordic chips use MCUboot Image Tool, you need to also edit the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option, with a value in the following format: ``"MAJOR . MINOR . PATCHLEVEL . TWEAK"``.

> For example:
> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example:

.. code-block:: console
```

   CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION=33907456
   CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING="2.5.99+0"
   CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION="2.5.99+0"

> Where 33907456 == 0x02056300 (hexadecimal versioning of 2.5.99.0)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where ``33907456`` is 0x02056300, the hexadecimal versioning of 2.5.99.0.
```

.. _ug_versioning_in_matter:

Maintaining firmware version
############################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> Device Firmware Update (DFU) is the procedure of upgrading the application firmware version on a device.
> For example, you can transfer the updated images to the device by:
> 
> * Upgrade over Bluetooth® Low Energy (LE).
> * :ref:`Upgrade over Matter (Matter OTA)<ug_matter_overview_dfu>`, where the updates are sent over the Matter fabric.
> 
> Before creating and performing DFU, you need to prepare a proper versioning configuration.
> Versioning can be maintained by creating a :ref:`VERSION<app-version-details>` file, or by using Kconfig options.

Reviewer: I wonder if we need description of DFU. At this point user is familiar with DFU procedure from the previous documentation pages.

What about to change this entire paragraph to something like this:
```suggestion
To effectively deploy a Matter product, it is essential to implement application version management. This versioning is crucial for managing firmware upgrades on devices, and it is also displayed within ecosystem applications, as provided by the Basic Information cluster.

There are two primary approaches for maintaining versioning. It's important to note that these approaches should not be used simultaneously:

Utilizing a VERSION file, as detailed in the Zephyr Project documentation: [Zephyr Project Versioning](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/version/index.html#). This method involves defining the version information in a specific file format.

Implementing dedicated Kconfig configurations. This approach uses Kconfig system configurations to set and manage the versioning details.

Choose the approach that best aligns with your project requirements and infrastructure.
```

There are two primary approaches for maintaining versioning. It's important to note that these approaches should not be used simultaneously:

Utilizing a :file:`VERSION` file as detailed in the Zephyr Project documentation: :ref:`Zephyr Project Versioning<app-version-details>`. This method involves defining the version information in a specific file format.

Implementing dedicated Kconfig configurations. This approach uses Kconfig system configurations to set and manage the versioning details.

Choose the approach that best aligns with your project requirements and infrastructure.

Using :file:`VERSION` file
**************************

To implement versioning based on a :file:`VERSION` file, you must create a file named :file:`VERSION` within the application directory and ensure it contains the appropriate content:

.. code-block:: console

    VERSION_MAJOR =
    VERSION_MINOR =
    PATCHLEVEL =
    VERSION_TWEAK =

.. note::
   You must assign a value to at least one of the variables.
   If not, the :file:`VERSION` file will cause error.

For example:

.. code-block:: console

   VERSION_MAJOR = 2
   VERSION_MINOR = 5
   PATCHLEVEL = 99
   VERSION_TWEAK = 0

> A :file:`VERSION` file is responsible for assigning values to MCUboot version in the following format: ``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH.TWEAK``.

Reviewer 3: `+TWEAK` here as well? Also, below in the format you use spaces around dots and here you don't - can this be aligned?

Moreover, shouldn't we explain how Matter OTA image version is derived out of these components?

Using KConfig options
*********************

Depending on how you transfer the updated images to the device, you need to use different Kconfig options.

.. _ug_matter_dfu_ota:

Device Firmware Upgrade over Matter versioning
==============================================

When using DFU over Matter, you must edit the :file:`prj.conf` file in the application directory.
Add the following Kconfig options to change the version:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION` to set to the version number.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_SOFTWARE_VERSION_STRING` to set the version string.

> Additionally, since Nordic chips use MCUboot Image Tool, you need to also edit the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option, with a value in the following format: ``"MAJOR . MINOR . PATCHLEVEL . TWEAK"``.

Reviewer: One more comment.. Here i do see " . (dot) TWEAK" but in below examples, i do see "+" sign. Maybe all is fine, but it might be confusing.

Author: Good point, I didn't catch that

* Utilizing a :file:`VERSION` file as detailed in the Zephyr Project documentation: :ref:`Zephyr Project Versioning<app-version-details>`. This method involves defining the version information in a specific file format.

* Implementing dedicated Kconfig configurations. This approach uses Kconfig system configurations to set and manage the versioning details.

Choose the approach that best aligns with your project requirements and infrastructure.

Using :file:`VERSION` file
**************************

To implement versioning based on a :file:`VERSION` file, you must create a file named :file:`VERSION` within the application directory and ensure it contains the appropriate content:

.. code-block:: console

    VERSION_MAJOR =
    VERSION_MINOR =
    PATCHLEVEL =
    VERSION_TWEAK =

.. note::
   You must assign a value to at least one of the variables.
   If not, the :file:`VERSION` file will cause error.

For example:

.. code-block:: console

   VERSION_MAJOR = 2
   VERSION_MINOR = 5
   PATCHLEVEL = 99
   VERSION_TWEAK = 0

A :file:`VERSION` file is responsible for assigning values in the following format for:

> * MCUboot version: ``MAJOR . MINOR . PATCHLEVEL + TWEAK``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* MCUboot version: ``MAJOR . MINOR . PATCHLEVEL + TWEAK``.
  The above example would be formatted as ``2 . 5 . 99 + 0``.
```

> * Matter OTA: in the 32 bit int where every variable is 8 bit long eg. ``0x02056300``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Matter OTA: in the 32-bit integer where each variable is 8 bits long.
  The above example would be formatted as ``0x02056300``.
```
